BASED ON THE NOVEL
THE CHILDREN'S TRAIN BY VIOLA ARDONE
VIOLIN SOLOIST - AMERIGO BENVENUTI
MARCH 18, 1994 AT 8:30 P.M.
- Good evening, Maestro.
- Good evening.
Hello?
Hi, Mom.
Yes, I just got here.
I still need to get ready.
What is it?
When?
I see.
Yes, of course. I will.
I have to go now.
I'll call you after the concert, Mom.
Bye.
Yes?
Good evening, Maestro.
Are you ready?
There's a lovely turnout tonight.
Did you choose the shoes yet?
What's the matter?
My mother died.
Should we cancel the concert?
No.
- We can, if you don't feel up to it.
- Of course not. Don't worry.
Everything's fine.
Maestro.
Go ahead.
NAPLES 1944
Hey! Get out of your houses!
- Run!
- Faster!
Amerigo!
- Run!
- Amerigo!
Where's Amerigo?
- I didn't see anyone!
- That's impossible!
- Amerigo! No!
- Just run!
Amerigo!
Did you see Amerigo?
How is it possible? Amerigo!
Amerigo!
Mom?
- Ameri...
- Mom?
Amerigo, where are you?
- Where are you?
- Mom?
- Where are you, Amerigo?
- Mom...
- Amerigo.
Are you okay?
Damn you.
THE CHILDREN'S TRAIN
NAPLES 1946
One point. Two points.
Zero points.
One point.
No points.
Star prize!
Enough with the numbers, Amerigo.
Hurry up.
If I get to ten,
something good will happen.
- Where are you taking me?
- This one?
- This one.
- Just the one.
- Here. You want pizza too?
- Come.
Amerigo, come on.
- Hello.
- Hello, ma'am.
- Is this where the communists are?
- First floor.
- Zero.
- Russo.
- It's still early.
- Zero.
- It's okay.
Zero.
- Zero--
- You're obsessed.
Desiano.
- Where will they take us?
- Speranza?
That's me!
Go.
You're doing your son a big favor.
You're very brave.
People don't trust us.
Comrades went from house to house.
You understood right away.
Stop it! I'm sorry.
Let him be.
Let him be. Look.
- Do you know what this is?
- No.
No? This is a medal of valor.
The Germans tried to blow up
the Sanità Bridge,
but we saved it.
That's how I got it.
They should've given you good shoes.
Yours have holes in them.
Let's go. See what he's like?
He's a punishment from God.
Are you sure you want him?
He's the only one I have left.
- I need to think about it.
- Of course.
Where are you going?
Pork rind and ricotta. Just one.
Sure, ma'am.
Here's your pizza, young man.
Thanks.
You heard her, right?
You're a big boy now. You're eight.
Things here are...
I mean, we need to figure out...
- You know me, Amerigo, words...
- They're not your thing.
Yeah. Look at the state of you.
They're taking all the children
and putting them on a train.
That's 200 children.
Two hundred? There are
way more than that. Poor kids.
- They're going to work in America.
- You got it wrong.
They're Russians, not Americans.
They'll cut their hands and feet off
and throw them in the oven. Poor things.
The Russians, they eat children.
None of this would've happened
if the King was here.
Why are you talking? You don't have kids.
Kids are not for sale.
It's a matter of dignity!
The communists want to help.
They want to give us some hope.
Godless people.
They want to turn the world upside-down.
Let's not exaggerate.
Antonietta, you're selling your son too?
I didn't expect that from you.
Hey. You know my story.
My husband had to go to America
to seek his fortune.
Antonietta, give me a break. America.
Let's go.
The nuns.
Antonietta. You're a good Christian.
The Lord sees everything, you know?
Children don't belong to their mothers
or fathers. They're God's children.
What do you want from me?
I didn't decide anything.
Excuse me.
I really didn't need
a lecture from the nuns.
Where were they when my Luigi got sick?
- You really want to send me to Russia?
- Russia, Amerì?
Don't you start too.
I want to go to America to meet my dad.
- Your father's a great man.
- When's he coming back?
He'll come back.
Sooner or later.
Listen carefully, kids.
Women and wine,
they're one and the same, okay?
You either dominate them,
or they'll dominate you.
Do as Capa 'E Fierro does.
You must always be free men.
- Got it?
- Yes, got it, Capa 'E Fierro.
Here.
- And this?
- Give it to me!
- And this? It's for whoever catches it.
- I caught it!
- Good morning, Capa 'E Fierro.
- Hello, Don Michele.
- Greetings. Have a nice day.
- You too, ma'am.
Hey, kiddo. Where's your mom?
- Good morning, Capa 'E Fierro.
- Hello.
- Do you need anything?
- Two sacks.
Here you go.
COLOMBIAN COFFEE
And this is for your trouble.
Don't worry. There's room under the bed.
What about on top of the bed?
Is there any room there?
- No coffee for me?
- Of course.
What about you?
When are you going to the Soviets?
- What do you care?
- Show some respect!
Let him be. You'll see,
they'll teach you some manners in Siberia.
- Go. I need to talk to your mother.
- I'm busy.
So stubborn. Go find some rags!
Go.
Don't come back with an empty basket.
Come here.
- I thought you wanted coffee.
- I want you, not coffee.
Keep your voice down!
T-shirts, socks,
undershirts, kitchen towels.
- Old sheets, we'll take anything.
- We'll take anything.
If they had money,
they wouldn't send you to the communists.
Hey, kids, hold on.
- My dad's taking me to Ischia this year.
- Lucky you.
- Hello, Solachianello.
- Hi, Amerigo.
I'll shoot you!
Throw it here.
Smell them. Onions. Garlic.
Hey, get out of here. Don't touch.
How much is this?
It's all good stuff.
Hey, kid. We're working here.
Get out of here.
Not today. Go on.
Hey! I've got the best bread in Naples.
Come and buy some!
Broad beans, chickpeas. Come and get them.
Thief!
- Where?
- Thief! Catch him!
Get your hands off. Get out of here!
Feel it. Huh? It's soft as velvet.
It looks like ermine.
You'll be like a movie star.
- Alida Valli.
- It's beautiful.
Three animals for 250 lire.
You convinced me. I'll take one.
Here you go.
- You know what? I'll take one too.
- Right away. Here you are.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
But has a sweet fire
Once it enters the heart
They are darker...
Amerigo, you should choose better.
These aren't worth anything.
Who can forget you
Eyes that reason
Without speaking
Get those ice blocks off me.
What am I? Your heater?
- My feet are cold.
- Yeah, I noticed.
Hey, cut it out.
I'll kill you!
You, kill me?
Can't you see I'm stronger than you?
Yeah, sure. You'll end up dead here.
Yeah, right!
In the name of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit.
My beloved creator,
this is all I have to offer you.
I'm a widow with five children.
You're the only one who can help me.
Hey! Boys. You can't play in here.
Show some respect for the dead.
Get out of here.
Dear capuzzella, bring my son back.
He's a prisoner in Greece. I love you.
Capuzzella. My dear capuzzella...
What are you doing?
Stealing from the dead is a sin.
They're dead. They don't need to buy
anything. Better if I keep it.
Look. This one was blinded.
I think a bomb hit him.
This one was a soldier.
Damn you!
Tommasino, what do you make of this rat?
It's just a rat. And it's gross.
No. That's money.
What are you doing?
Gross.
Here. If my dad sees me, he'll kill me.
Thanks, Mariuccia. It's perfect.
What's wrong?
My dad wants to send me
on the communist train.
Why?
Because my brothers work in a warehouse,
but I'm useless.
I can't even heat up a plate of pasta.
Yeah, but nobody's born an expert.
They'll cut my hands off.
No, the communists will put you
in the oven.
Relax, Mariuccia. We'll make money
from these painted rats,
and they won't put us on that train.
What rats?
- These rats.
- Gross.
Get your furs. Fresh, live, new furs.
Look, they're still alive. You won't look
so poor with this around your neck.
Come and get them. Fresh furs.
Two animals for 200 lire.
No, that's too much.
- I only want one.
- Fine.
- I'll give you 100.
- All right.
Here.
Come and get them!
Get a present for your wife.
Two animals for 200 liras.
My God, it's raining! Run!
Pasqualino, stop staring at the rain.
Give me a hand, will you?
What did I bring you here for?
This is a rat. You filthy little cheats!
Call the police!
Call the police.
- Call the police!
- Forget the police!
We don't want the police here.
Get rid of this filth, kid.
I'll deal with you later.
Honey, let's go home.
The kids are getting wet.
- Come on, let's go.
- Let's go.
I know your story.
- Mom!
- I'm not sure I'm doing the right thing.
Will he be okay?
Yes! You made the right decision.
You're on your own, Antonietta.
You can't make it.
Look. Here he is. Hey, Amerigo.
Amerigo.
What's wrong? Amerigo.
The train will be fun, you'll see.
Up north, they'll treat you
like their own, okay?
They'll give you food every day,
clothes, new shoes. I'll be waiting.
What do you want to do?
If they give me new shoes,
I'll walk to the communists.
Go and dry off. It's ready.
Here. I'm not hungry.
Thank you.
Eat.
Ma'am, come, sit down.
- Hey.
- Sorry.
Stand straight. That's it.
Fusco? Desk...
- I don't want to go!
- ...four.
- We're here.
- Next.
- Stop scratching.
- It's itchy, Mom.
More to the center. That's it.
- Speranza. Table five.
- Yes. Let's go.
Next.
Don't be afraid. We're here to help you.
- I don't want to end up in the oven.
- Shut up.
- Does he sleep well?
- Yes.
Yes? Are you sure?
I've got trachoma.
Please, take him. Look how red his eye is.
- Does she go to school?
- She used to. She works now.
She can't walk well.
She got hurt while we were running...
When was she born?
May 12th, 1936. Just in time for the war.
A bullet grazed her head.
- Please, take both of them.
- The girl's too young, ma'am.
Do you have a job?
I did, but after the war,
the men took it back.
- The child's last name?
- Speranza.
- First name?
- Amerigo.
Age?
Eight years old. Eight.
Domicile?
- Where do you live?
- In Naples.
- Where?
- The Spanish Quarter.
What time does he go to bed?
When he's tired. Stop it.
- What grade is he in?
- He's too dumb for school.
I'm not dumb. I was supposed to go
to third grade. I can count ten times ten.
- Brothers? Sisters?
- Luigi. He's dead.
He was three. In just a month,
he died of asthma... What's it called?
- Bronchial asthma?
- Yeah.
I won't let it happen to him too. Stop it.
Don't cry. Don't worry.
You'll come back so nice and fat
your moms won't even recognize you.
- Okay? Don't worry.
- Martina, Antonio, come here.
Martina, come here.
Tommasino! Are you waiting
for the ferry to Ischia?
Are we ready? Come on,
the train's waiting. Put your shoes on.
I don't have any shoes.
- You don't?
- No.
Come on, get him some shoes.
Amerigo? Are you sure they fit?
Yeah, they're perfect. They fit.
- Aren't they a bit small?
- No. They're just fine.
All right.
No pushing. Slowly.
Come on, the train's leaving.
Don't sell your children.
They filled your heads with lies.
They're taking them to Siberia.
And you know what they'll do?
They'll boil them in big pots
and make soap!
Listen to her. She's telling the truth.
- It's true!
- She's not telling lies.
It's all true.
All true? No, it's not. Don't believe her.
Yes, it's true.
The ones who came back alive told us.
What are you talking about?
They're all lies! Shut up.
They're not God's children.
They're beasts!
- Beasts.
- Don't listen to her. It's not true.
They even eat the fatter ones.
- What are you... No! Stop!
- Shut up. Stop!
- Mom!
- No.
- Wait! Slow down!
- Stop!
Mom!
- Amerigo!
Mom.
- Get out of here.
- I want Mommy!
- Still going on about this.
- Come on, say goodbye. We need to go.
- Mommy!
- Come on, we need to leave.
- You're so handsome.
I don't care about new shoes anymore.
I don't want to go.
Don't listen to her. They'll be warm.
They'll be fed. Cared for.
How many did trachoma, rheumatism,
cholera take away from us?
Think about them. About their future.
Don't take this opportunity away
from your children.
To get rid of the Germans,
I picked up a gun and shot.
And I saw my 11-year-old nephew
Gennarino lying dead on the ground,
after he threw a hand grenade
at a German truck.
I never want to see that again.
Kids shot dead, never again!
This is another battle, against hunger.
If we women don't think
about our children, nobody will.
I love them just as much as you do.
And I'll bring them back to you.
On my honor!
Go, honey. Go.
Slowly.
Mom.
Hold on.
Here, for the trip.
Amerigo, go! Go on, go!
- Bye, take care of yourself.
- Behave, okay?
Come back soon.
Tommasino! Mariuccia!
We're taking the trip together.
Yeah, we're going together.
I love you, bye!
What's going on?
We're leaving our coats for our siblings.
What about us?
The communists will give us another one.
They're really rich.
Mom!
I love you.
GOODBYE MOM
WE'LL COME BACK STRONG AND HAPPY
THE CHILDREN OF NAPLES
THANK THE MOMS OF MODENA
Amerigo!
Giuseppe!
Mom!
Ame... Amerigo.
Amerigo...
LONG LIVE SOLIDARITY AMONG PEOPLE
I didn't throw my coat,
because my brother doesn't need it.
I'm sure my mom sold mine.
The numbers on our coats!
How will they recognize us?
They did it on purpose,
so they'll never find us again.
- What are you talking about?
- The Russians cut kids' hands off.
Yeah, right. My mom said
we're going up north for a while.
- They said that to convince them.
- I'm afraid they'll cut my hands off.
- We want to get off!
- Let us out!
What's going on? Quiet.
What's going on?
Hey! Enough! What's all the racket?
It's a long trip. Behave.
You'll drive us all crazy.
Sit down and behave. You, sit down.
- Give me your hands.
- No!
- Are you scared?
You. What's your name?
Tommaso Saporito.
Give me your hand.
- You? What's your name?
- Vincenzo Esposito.
- And what's your name?
- Amerigo Speranza.
What are you doing with that hat?
Put your hat on.
Sit down. Go to your seat.
Stop playing with the door.
Hey! It's a long trip.
Get comfortable and be quiet.
Come on. Get some sleep.
Good thing this one's already asleep.
Amerigo, you too. Take your shoes off
and get comfortable. It's a long journey.
No, thanks, ma'am.
I'm scared someone will steal them.
Who's going to steal them?
Come on. Get some sleep.
- Will we get there?
- Of course.
Look at all that milk.
That's not milk. It's sugar.
What are you two talking about?
That's frozen water. Like Don Mimì's.
Yeah, but without the cherry on top.
That's snow.
WELCOME CHILDREN OF THE SOUTH
WITH THE PEOPLE, FOR THE PEOPLE
Welcome!
NORTH AND SOUTH ARE BROTHERS
ITALY UNITED, THANKS CHILDREN
BYE MOM
WE'LL COME BACK STRONG AND HAPPY
NO NORTH, NO SOUTH, ONLY ITALY
NORTH AND SOUTH
ALL BROTHERS AND SISTERS
Come on, cubs.
Eat up! You sure won't be famished here.
Hey! She's saying this food is for you.
As long as you're here,
you'll never be hungry. Eat up.
Come on, tuck away. It's for you.
Eat.
What's the matter? Huh? You don't talk
anymore? Did someone cut out your tongues?
But Miss, there is...
What?
Mold.
Mold?
They want to poison us.
Silence!
- Is there a problem?
- No problem.
Look here. This? This isn't mold.
This is a delicacy.
It's called mortadella.
- It's good.
- It's very good.
Eat up.
- I already have some.
- Nice.
- Who wanted some? No?
- I've got some already.
You do? Does anybody want some milk?
- You can have more.
- It's good.
Go. Let's put it there.
Careful, it's heavy.
They're waiting for you.
That's good.
- Give me your hand.
- Oh, that's right.
- Hello.
- I'm Patrizia Ventura.
- The little girl there.
- Hold on, we'll find her. Over there.
- Okay. Thank you.
You wait there.
Are you Maria?
No, don't be scared.
What a pretty name.
What a pretty little girl you are.
Give me your hand.
You don't have to be scared of us. Look.
Look what I brought you. Take one.
Good girl. Come on, let's go home.
I have all the candy you want. Come on.
Come.
Tommasino, if we tell them we're brothers,
they'll put us together.
Amerigo, these people are from the north,
but they're no fools.
- Amerigo or Tommaso?
- Tommaso.
That one's Tommaso.
- Are you Tommaso?
- Yes.
I'm Libero.
We were liberated too.
Come on, let's go.
We're half an hour away.
Gina already set the table.
Come on, let's go.
Let's hope you're still hungry
after all that mortadella.
Come.
- No. Come on.
- Listen.
You have to make a sacrifice.
You said the Rocchis would come.
Yes, but Agostina's in labor right now.
I don't even have a room.
What do we do? Leave him there?
Of course not, poor thing.
No one else from the party can take him.
- Come on.
- Please.
Hi.
My name's Derna.
Amerigo Speranza.
Go on. The hour grows late.
Get moving. It's getting dark.
Good God.
It's cold up here,
and you don't have a coat.
- Luckily, I have a blanket in the cart.
- Bye, Amerigo.
- Bye.
Yeah, bye.
It's just me, myself and I.
You probably wanted a family.
Can you understand what I say?
I live alone. Maybe you wanted to be
with a real family.
I don't know. I only wanted to be
with my own mom.
Mom!
There's a monster!
What's the matter?
Calm down. It's okay.
Where am I?
Don't worry. We're at home.
Are you thirsty?
- Yes.
- Miss, please don't leave.
- Don't leave, Miss!
- I'm coming, I'm here. I'm right here.
I'm here.
Here you are.
Drink slowly.
Did you have a nightmare?
Can you sing?
No, I don't know any lullabies,
so forget that.
Can you read?
Yes, that I can do.
That's not for kids.
- It's not a children's book.
- It's fine. Read, come on.
You'll see it's not for you.
Okay...
"Short history of Italian trade unions."
"The General Labor Confederation,
or CGdL, was founded in 1906,
bringing together all the labor forces."
"The dual structure is confirmed."
"Vertical, with trade federations,
and horizontal, with the Labor Chambers."
"The federations' goal is to address
the interests of the sector,
whereas the individual chambers..."
What happened, Miss? Did a bomb go off?
It's not a bomb. It's fog.
We need to get some fresh milk.
And call me Derna.
Don't be scared. It's a cow.
I'm not scared.
Have you ever seen an animal at home?
Just rats. We ate all the rest, even cats.
There.
Oh. Well... Look at you.
Luzio's clothes fit you just right.
Don't they?
Look at you.
This is Amerigo.
Hi, Amerigo.
That's my brother Alcide.
And these are my nephews.
Go on, tell him your names.
From now on, everyone speak clearly.
So we understand each other.
You hear that? Go on.
My name's Rivo.
And you? Are you being shy? Come on.
This is Luzio.
And this little guy here is Nario.
Rivo, Luzio, and Nario.
See what I came up with? Revolutionary!
That's mine. It's not yours!
How many times do I have to tell you?
Mine and yours don't exist in this house.
We say that things belong to whoever...?
To whoever...?
Needs them!
Rosa, you're raising a fascist, you know?
- Come on.
- And touchy too.
Come on, get moving. Go do your chores.
You should know
that we all keep at it on Sunday.
Everybody works on Sunday.
Rivo will show you, okay?
Hey. Welcome, son. Come on.
Come with me.
Go with Rivo. I...
I'm going to the Party. I'll be back.
Before the war, we had three.
The Germans took the other ones.
Her name's Marta.
Do you like the name? I chose it.
We already crossed paths.
What?
She's pregnant. See?
You can go closer. She's good.
It's the bull that's mean.
Hey, Nario.
Hey, little guy. You okay?
Little boy.
Thief! I saw you!
Ouch!
Quiet. Don't cry. Quiet, please.
Be quiet. Don't cry. Quiet.
Listen.
When Maddalena asked me
to take one of the children, I said no.
I know nothing about kids.
I know about politics,
trade unions, but not kids.
They're not your thing.
- What do you mean?
- That you're not good at it.
That's what I always said to my mom.
Why? What's your mom like?
She's beautiful.
The most beautiful woman in Naples.
I see men look at her,
but she doesn't pay them any attention.
I'm the only man who sleeps in her bed.
She's lucky to have a man like you, then.
Actually, she says
I'm a punishment from God.
Come on, sit down.
Look at that. It's so big.
- Are you going to get some wood?
- Yes.
Good boys.
Why does Derna dress in black
like an old lady?
- Because she's always thinking about Lupo.
- Who's that?
Lupo was a partisan hero.
He blew up the German post in Cavazzona.
He'd hide in the woods,
but one day, while he was coming down
the mountain to go see his grandma,
the fascists caught him,
and they tied him to a truck, alive.
They dragged him all over town.
He was howling like an animal.
Aunt Derna's always thinking about him.
Hey! Where are you going?
Amerigo. Come here.
I'll show you how to make bread. Come.
- Hi, Amerigo!
- Come on!
- Come on.
- Come and see the oven.
- Come on, Amerigo.
- What's wrong?
- Amerigo!
- Don't you like it?
- Amerigo.
- He's scared.
I don't want to go in the oven.
They were right.
Amerigo!
What are you doing here?
I don't want to go in the oven.
In the oven?
What did they tell you?
Come on, son. Let's go home.
Don't worry.
Home is Naples.
Come with me.
When the wheat sprouts,
and the field turns yellow,
that's when you can go
back home to Naples. Okay?
How long will that take?
Not long. You'll see.
Time goes by quickly.
Easy, or it'll break. It's like a bayonet.
I'm not wearing girls' clothes.
Everyone wears a smock.
There are no poor or rich at school.
- I'm not going to school.
- Wait.
Luzio's here too. Aren't you happy?
- Hi, Luzio.
- Hi.
I don't want to see him.
That's enough. You're going to school now.
I don't want to.
You already know everything?
Yes.
Benvenuti and Speranza. That's enough!
- But, Miss...
- Silence. Or I'll send you out.
Benvenuti, it's on you. Speranza is new.
Okay, children.
The war is over, now we're at school.
You have to pay attention. Backs straight.
You can't eat bread. Put it away.
No sleeping on the desk.
- Stop it!
- Sit up. Wake up.
We don't pick our nose
to play jokes on your friends.
Now, who can tell me
what two times seven is?
Speranza.
Two times seven is 14.
Well done, Speranza. Had you already
studied your times tables back home?
No, Miss. In Naples,
I used to count shoes in twos.
Let's go. Slowly.
I'll see you after the break. Slowly.
Can you smell that stink of fish too?
It stinks of fish.
Naples, are you the one
who stinks of fish?
He stinks of fish.
Shut up. Your name's Benito, you fascist!
Whatever, forget it.
Let's go out to the yard.
Thanks.
Anyway, you do stink of fish.
I got you ruled and squared notebooks
and coloring pencils.
Thank you!
I've never had these.
There's even a yellow one.
You still need a pencil sharpener, though.
I can sharpen them with a blade.
With a knife.
Do you need anything else?
Yes.
They say I stink at school.
The kids in your class are ignorant.
Don't listen to them.
Every acorn thinks it'll be an oak tree,
but most of them will be fed to the pigs.
Gramsci's words.
- Want more hot water?
- No, I'm done.
- Here.
- I'm cold.
I'm still cold.
- Better?
- Yes.
I'm the mortadella thief.
Don't send me away.
There are no thieves in this house.
Listen carefully.
Can you hear
how the A string isn't in tune?
- Hi, Luzio.
- Hi.
See these? They're called tuners.
You just have to tighten the string
by turning this little peg clockwise.
Quiet, Luzio, we can't hear a thing.
Come on.
There. Hear the difference?
Music is beautiful. It has the power
of a thousand thoughts.
You think so? My dad was a carpenter.
But his passion was music.
He passed it on to me.
But none of these knuckleheads care.
I don't like music.
Go on, give it a try.
Hold it like this. Good.
Chin on the chin rest.
Hold the bow like I taught you to. There.
- Good morning, Alcide. Hi, Luzio.
- Hi.
I came to get the chair back.
Hello, Mrs. Daniela.
Here it is, as good as new.
Oh, poor things. They made them travel
all the way up here,
then when the vacation's over,
they go back to their misery.
- Right. Come.
- How much do I owe you?
Don't worry. You'll pay me another time.
It's not easy. You're generous,
especially with three kids already.
Hey. No!
Well, at least you had the chance
to learn a trade.
What do you want to do when you
grow up? Repair instruments too?
No! I want to play instruments.
- He wants to play.
- Play.
All right, Benvenuti. Write what you buy
at the butcher's on the blackboard.
BUTCHER?
BANGERS
Benvenuti, what are "bangers"?
Children, please! We speak properly
at school. We say "sausages."
Write, "sausa..."
Since you find it so funny,
tell us what you buy at the butcher's.
What's a butcher?
Children, silence, please.
The butcher is the shop
where you buy meat, Speranza.
Oh, the chianchiere.
What's a chianchiere?
The chianchiere?
At the butcher's,
you can buy 'o pere e 'o musso.
Operemus? Did you study Latin, Speranza?
It could be Latin, because 'o pere
e 'o musso is an antique delicacy.
What is it in Italian?
'O pere is the pig's foot,
and 'o musso is the snout.
Gross.
- Gross.
- Children, please. Silence.
Good morning, headmaster.
This is Rossana Palma. She's from Naples.
Please, treat her well.
Of course, headmaster.
Thank you, headmaster. Goodbye.
- Goodbye.
- Cantarelli, sit next to Speranza.
Rossana, please go sit
where Cantarelli was.
Benvenuti, sit next to Rossana,
so you and Speranza cut it out.
So, back to sausages. What do you
buy at the butcher's? Sausages.
In Italian, we say...
Sausages.
Well done.
On behalf of the party, we're very happy
you're willing to take Rossana in.
Yeah, well, I just hope you communists
don't want to exploit
this simple Christian gesture.
You know our Pope doesn't really agree
with these transfers.
Come on, it's ready.
- Come on. Amerigo, you sit here for today.
- Time to eat.
I didn't know you were such a good cook.
Rosa made the tortelloni.
I made the broth.
Derna's a good unionist,
but she can cook too.
Can she?
Sit down, Rossana.
I don't need your charity.
I don't want it.
This is not charity. We want you here.
My parents are supposed to want me,
not you.
Let her be. I'll talk to her later.
Come on.
"It had gotten so hot..."
Are you doing this for us out of charity?
No, Amerigo. No.
Come on. Bedtime.
The wheat's still green, right?
Yes. We still have time.
It only just sprouted.
- Good night.
Luzio, leave the hen alone.
- It's time for the cake.
- Cake!
- Come here. Look at that.
- Good boy.
Happy birthday to you
Happy birthday, Amerigo
Yeah! Many happy returns, son.
This... is for you.
Come on, open it. We don't have all day.
Easy, Luzio!
Come and sit down.
You already had your birthday.
It's Amerigo's turn today.
- Do you like it? Alcide made it.
- Exactly, with these little hands...
Is this for me? It's for me?
Of course it's for you, son.
- What is it?
- I don't know.
So... Derna, you?
And you know what? I'll teach you
how to play it too. Pass me the violin.
Here.
But remember, take good care of it
and always keep it with you.
This is a special violin.
This is your violin. Look here...
-"Amerigo Speranza."
- Yes.
- Come on. Are we eating the cake or what?
- Yeah!
No. Hold on.
There's another surprise for Amerigo.
This came from Naples.
Amerigo. Go on.
Read us what your mom says. We're curious.
- He wants to read it alone.
- That's okay.
Who wants cake?
- Me!
- Come on. Pass those plates.
Me!
"Dear Amerigo,
I couldn't write to you earlier
because I had lots to do
and I was ashamed to ask Maddalena."
"All the women on our street
are so grateful,
they all turned communist."
"I'm happy you're eating.
They put Capa 'E Fierro in jail."
Capa 'E Fierro is in jail.
I'm happy. He's gone.
She talks about you too.
She said you can't be very lucky,
because out of all the kids who left,
you ended up with me,
and I'm a punishment from God.
You're good.
Really good. Had you already played?
It's not your first time.
No, I never played the violin.
This is the first time.
Someone taught you something about music.
Like your dad, or your mom?
My dad went to America.
That's what Mom says.
And your mom?
My mom sings beautifully.
Then you take after her.
You have a good ear, you can tell.
Your mom taught you.
Yeah, right. Mom taught me
how to make smokes.
To make what?
To make cigarettes.
Go on. Keep playing.
But remember, Amerigo,
you need to practice every day.
Every day, okay?
The problem is that these guys think
we'll just go home without saying a word.
- And they'll go back to work.
- That's how it is.
We rolled up our sleeves and worked
in the factories during the war.
That's how it is. When the men come back,
whatever we did doesn't count.
But the union can't stop
representing women...
- Of course not.
- ...now that the war's over.
- Now's the time.
- Just a moment.
- Yes, but we can't just...
- We need to...
Amerigo!
- What are we going to do?
- We gathered the sign-ups...
We have all the signatures.
I think you practiced enough for today.
Alcide said I have to practice
all the time, every day.
And you have improved,
but I have a meeting.
- Unity is strength.
- Yeah, unity is strength, but then...
Yes, I already have some sign-ups.
- Hi, Amerigo.
- Hi.
But we can't...
No, it's important that they come,
they speak and tell us about their work.
- Yeah.
- We'll let them speak onstage.
Yes, right. Onstage.
- Go on, write.
- Give some names.
- Go on.
- Okay, Albertina Vanotti.
- Albertina...
- Then...
Cesarina Sartor.
Anna Maria Girone.
Federica Schiatti.
Girone is the one who was seeing Fausto?
Of course.
- She was.
- Yeah, she was.
And Edda too.
- Edda too? No way.
- Yeah.
- Who isn't seeing Fausto?
- Write.
- We'll call Edda too then.
- Come on.
WORKERS
Well done!
Take this and go have a look around.
Come on. You can go now.
Rivo, watch your brother.
- Luzio, be good, okay?
- Yeah.
LONG LIVE MAY 1ST
LABOR DAY
- Come and dance with us.
- No.
Come on.
- It's written here.
- Yes, I saw it. May 10...
Amerigo Speranza!
Tommasino! Long time no see.
- It's really you.
- Yeah.
Wow, you look great.
You look like a movie star.
You look pretty good yourself.
Are you a communist now?
Yeah.
- Did you see Mariuccia?
- Mariuccia? Where is she?
Come with me.
I'm not giving you my cane!
I'll just take it then, you donkey!
Take this! And this!
Mariuccia, is it really you?
Amerigo. Tommasino.
How are you?
It's been ages. How's it going?
Mom, Dad, these are my friends
from down south.
- Hi, kids.
What a handsome trio.
Mariuccia, did they cut your tongue out
and swap it with one from the north?
Come.
Go, Mariuccia. Go with them.
It's your turn, go on.
Yes, another one.
- Yes.
- Hurry up, Gilda's coming.
Luzio, Rossana,
these are my friends from down south.
I'm Tommasino.
Me, I'm Maria.
Children, there are people waiting.
Go play somewhere else.
- Thank you.
- You're welcome.
Rossana's from Naples too.
She took the train after we did.
She goes to my school.
Yeah, but she's different.
You're not like them.
I want to leave.
They can't force me to stay here.
See? She's not like you.
They can't force you.
I don't mind if you want to stay, though.
Why don't you go back south
to your mother?
She probably doesn't want you either.
That's why you came here.
- That's not true.
- Nobody wants you.
- Nobody!
- Shut up!
Stop it, Benvenuti!
Leave him alone!
- Enough!
- Stop.
That's enough! Stop it!
- Stop it! Enough. We don't do that.
- Break it off.
Well?
- Behave.
- What are you doing?
The women workers will go onstage,
but let's have the experts talk.
Anyway, we already decided who...
We know about politics
just as much as you.
We fought the fascists more than you did.
We fed the soldiers,
we made civilian clothes,
we used our weapons.
Some of us got a medal of valor.
What do you want?
A medal for hanging a few banners?
I deserve one for being
in the party with people like you.
Go.
My mom would've reacted.
She'd have slapped that creep back twice.
I'm not afraid of anything.
I did all sorts of things during the war.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I did!
I don't know why I didn't react...
- You need to punch him next time.
- Yeah.
Like I did today, with Luzio.
I taught him a lesson.
- Why? What did you do?
- Nothing.
There's a limit to one's patience.
Was your boyfriend really called Lupo?
They called him Lupo.
But his real name was Giacomo.
I'm sorry...
That's enough.
Come on, eat.
She asked to go to the bathroom,
and never came back. I'm sorry.
Don't worry. Let's go back to class.
Let's go.
Come on.
Luzio, where's Rossana? What's going on?
Rossana!
Rivo, we need to look everywhere!
Until we find her!
Rossana!
Be careful! Look everywhere!
Luzio, what's the matter?
Come down.
- What's the matter?
- Rossana's dead. It's my fault.
I told her which way to go. It's my fault.
What are you talking about?
She wanted to leave,
so I told her about
the train tracks behind the farm,
and to follow them all the way to Modena.
Are you crazy?
If we hear the train whistle,
we jump into the ditch.
If we make it on time.
Rossana!
Rossana. Is that you?
Are you okay?
Yes.
Come. Come home.
Everyone's looking for you. Come on.
No, I'm not going anywhere.
There's a dead body.
What are you talking about? Where?
Don't worry. You stay here,
I'll go take a look.
What did you find? What is it?
It's just a dead animal.
Come with me.
We'll walk around the dead animal.
Don't look, okay? Don't look.
What did you do?
I put a coin in his eye, like the women do
at the cemetery for our ancestors.
That's how they remember the dead.
It gives them the strength to go on.
Luzio!
Luzio! Where are you? Luzio!
Amerigo!
Where are you?
Come and get me.
- Amerigo. Luzio. Come here.
- Come on.
Hold on.
There's the tortellini Rosa made for you.
And some bread and mortadella,
to eat during the trip.
I put some salami too.
Then you can eat it with your mom.
There are your books, your violin,
your clothes, everything.
I'll write to you.
You can write back if you want, okay?
Okay.
Come on, son,
you're going home to your mom!
- To your city. Aren't you happy?
- Yeah.
Go on, they're waiting for you.
Are you glad you're going back?
Very. And you? Are you glad I'm leaving?
Of course! But you'll come back, right?
- Of course he will.
- Yeah.
- Now catch me.
- No, Luzio. Come on, stop it.
- No. Stop.
- Got you!
- Now you catch me!
- Enough.
Amerigo!
Thank goodness. I thought you'd stay here.
Tommasino!
Remember, son, keep playing
because you're good at it.
- And come and visit us, okay?
- Yes.
- Bye, darling.
- Bye.
Okay, so...
Bye-bye.
Bye!
Be good.
Hey. You knew he'd have to go back.
Yeah, I knew, but...
Yeah... We knew.
That's right, eat up.
Do you want anything else?
My northern mom gave this to me.
This is for the train,
so I can come back when I want.
Wait, I'll be right back.
Piazza Garibaldi... Naples Mergellina!
Naples, Piazza Garibaldi!
ELECTRIC AND OXYGEN WELDING
AFFORDABLE PRICES
Mom.
Are you tired, Amerigo?
It was a long trip.
It was really long.
I thought we'd never arrive.
They gave me plenty of things
to bring home. Even a salami.
A calf was born. They named it after me.
Right, because one animal wasn't enough.
Now there are two with the same name.
Capa 'E Fierro moved to Afragola
with his family.
It's just you and me now.
You hungry?
Derna made a sandwich with pink salami.
Eat it, it's good. It's called mortadella.
What's that?
Mom, this is a violin.
Oh. They turned you
into a music teacher up north?
- It's got my name on it.
- I can't read.
I can play it for you, though.
Listen to me.
We don't have time for this stuff here.
I spoke to Solachianello again.
He'll take you on at his shop.
You can learn a trade, and when
you're good at it, he'll even pay you.
No, don't.
- No.
- Amerigo.
You don't need it now.
Where are your manners? Not even a hello.
Antonietta, you wanted to keep him
all to yourself?
Can he come with me?
I want to see if he remembers
how to make onion frittata.
He forgot. Believe me.
He forgot everything up there,
even his mom.
What are you saying, Antonietta?
He's a kid, he'll get over it.
You never forget your mom.
First, she sends me there,
then she gets mad at me.
I want to go back
where they love me and think about me.
My mom doesn't love me anymore.
Kid, your mom never received affection.
That's why she doesn't have any to give.
She took care of you for a long time.
Now that you've grown,
you need to help her.
Understand?
Let's go. Come cut the onions with me,
we need to make a frittata.
Come here.
Every two weeks, my mom picks up
a package from Maddalena.
They send us cheese, vegetables.
Lots of things.
My northern mom sent us a potato pie.
She put pink salami in it,
which my southern mom really likes.
Too bad all the jam jars broke.
What about you? Nothing?
Well, don't worry.
I'm sure it'll all get here soon.
It's been three months.
They forgot about me.
Thanks.
Here, eat. You worked all day.
Without speaking...
What does Solachianello say?
Are you behaving yourself?
Did he teach you anything?
Yes. Did you go back to Maddalena
to see if they wrote to me?
I already told you, Amerigo.
There's nothing there.
When will he start paying you?
Amerigo?
- When's he paying you?
- When did you go there?
Enough! I told you there's nothing there.
Go home, Amerigo. Let's call it a day.
What's it like up north, Amerigo?
They don't make noise,
and they listen to you when you talk.
Mariuccia didn't want to come back.
Good choice.
Where is it?
It has to be here somewhere!
In May, four Sicilian children
were shot dead
and 11 farmers down on Labor Day
in Portella della Ginestra.
The left was driven out by the government.
A new war has begun above our heads.
We only had two years of peace in Italy...
ITALIAN COMMUNIST PARTY
Amerigo.
Excuse me just a moment.
Amerigo, I've been waiting for you.
I thought something happened to you.
I didn't think you were like that.
I mean, those people fed you,
took care of you.
They treated you like their own.
You could've answered.
Your mom told me you would've come
to pick everything up. I waited, but...
Where is it?
Here it is.
Here you go.
There were packages full of food too,
but I gave it to those who needed it.
It was a shame to let it go bad.
What's the matter?
Hey.
Your mom didn't tell you anything?
Don't worry, it's not a big deal.
Take a seat over there, okay?
Wait for me while I finish my meeting,
then we can write them a nice letter.
We can tell them
there was a problem with the mail,
but then you got everything, okay?
Amerigo.
What are you doing there?
Are you feeling sick?
Where's my violin?
- I want to know where my violin is.
- Violins are for the rich.
It was mine! Where is it?
It's at the pawn shop.
With that money I bought food,
new shoes for you, and I put some aside,
because you never know.
Anything could happen to us.
You need to wake up from this dream.
Your life is here.
Your mind's always elsewhere.
Do you want to get sick too?
It's for your own good.
You're a liar!
Where are you going?
Is this train leaving now?
Of course it's leaving now.
Where's your mom?
Over there.
Come, sweetie. Sit here.
You sit there. Be good, okay?
Try to rest a bit.
- We're about to leave. Are you happy?
- Yes.
Are you on your own? Where are you going?
To my aunt in Modena.
I can't read.
It says I have to go there
and live with her.
Where's your mom?
She's dead.
Did you hear the whistle?
We're leaving, honey.
NAPLES PAWN SHOP
ANTONIETTA SPERANZA
VIOLIN - 30 LIRE - REPAID
When you ran away,
that woman got in touch with me.
I told her she could keep you,
if she wanted to.
Otherwise, you had to come straight home.
I waited for you.
You were all I had.
Are you cold?
Amerigo.
- When you ran away...
- How did you get here?
...I could've come to get you.
I had your address.
But I didn't.
Sometimes, those who let you go
love you more...
Come here.
...than those who keep you.
Your eyes, so beautiful
Shine brighter than the stars
They are darker than darkness
Like two sighs
Each sigh burns
But has a sweet fire
Once it enters the heart
TO THE CHILDREN AND MOTHERS OF ALL WARS
It never leaves
THE CHILDREN'S TRAIN
BASED ON THE NOVEL
THE CHILDREN'S TRAIN BY VIOLA ARDONE
WE ARE THE CHILDREN OF THE SOUTH
THE SOLIDARITY AND LOVE OF THE EMILIANS
SHOW US THAT THERE IS NO NORTH
AND SOUTH. THERE IS JUST ITALY
Subtitle translation by: Paola Porciello